Abandonment & Emptiness|Embrace Your Safety Object|This can be a stuffed animal, a business acrd from a therapist, or anything that helps you feel secure and safe. Grab this item and sit with it, focus on how your hands feel touching it, take in its smell, and notice how close you feel to it.
Abandonment & Emptiness|Emptying Emptiness|Ask yourself "Why do I feel empty inside today?" Then "When did I last feel fuller or less empty?". Compare these two instances and remind yourself that you won't be empty forever; you can fill your life.
Abandonment & Emptiness|Lessening Loneliness|Resist the urge for self-blame when you fell lonely. Loneliness is not your fault and never proces that you're defective. You can lessen loneliness through social contact, online or in person, getting a pet, joing a workout class or volunteering. Don't stay idle; socialisation gives a sense of connection.
Abandonment & Emptiness|Emptiness Anxiety|It's normal to feel anxious when abandonment and emptiness creep up. Use this excess energy to get moving. Go for a walk, write in your journal, or exercise. This helps release the cortisol and adrenaline that ahve built up from the anxiety.
Abandonment & Emptiness|Do A Memory Redo|Memories aren't set in stone. We can reconstruct our memories to decrease the related emotions. Think about a memory, starting with one that's not too emotionally intense. Replay it or rewrite it, but imagine it in a way that you have control and add an ending that works in your favour.
Abandonment & Emptiness|Defeat Desertion|Fear of trust is often related to feeling deserted. Beat this by building trust with yourself. Do this by following through with promises, being open and honest with what you say, and acknowledging to yourself that you don;t know it all and you don't have to.
Abandonment & Emptiness|Fill Yourself Up|List three things you enjoy doing. Ask yourself, "What give me satisfaction?" Focus on what gives you a sense of purpose, enjoyment, and meaning. Create clear steps on how to do them and then don't debate with yourself, ENGAGE!
Abandonment & Emptiness|Go Pro with Your Social Circle|Prosocial activities such as donating, sharing, helping, or porviding support to another can expand your social circle an lessen the feelings of emptiness. This help to give you a feeling or purpose while relating to others with similar values.
Abandonment & Emptiness|Abandoning Social Media Emptiness|Social media can cause you to compare your life with the lives of others. Manage this activation by limiting social media access and the accounts you follow, and be sure to remind yourself that social media only shows 20% of someone's life, not all of it.
Abandonment & Emptiness|Embracing Your Worth|Your BPD may tell you you're not valuable enough to connect with others. That's trickery. Challenge those statements. Write down on sticky notes things that are special and unique about you. Put them on your bathroom mirror or take a picture of them on your phone (Or 3DS!). Look at them often to embrace your worth.
Relationship Patterns|Just the Right Speed|Relationship are best when they're not driven by urgency for intimacy or fear of abandonment. Think of three things you can do to go at "Just the right speed." These can be doing things for yourself like asserting your needs or communicating when you need space.
Relationship Patterns|Why Reminders|We all have a tendancy to forget why we're with the important people in our lives. Ask yourself, "Why am I with my partner?" Rediscover the things about them you like and appreciate then tell them. This is great for kids, too!
Relationship Patterns|Nurture Relationships|It's essential to nurture the important relationships in your life. Nurturance is strengthened when we confide in our partner, show appreciate, take responsibility for our own words and actions, and provide emotional support. What can you do to better nurture your relationship?
Relationship Patterns|Art of Giving to Give|Give without string or expectations. This encourage stability in relationships. When you give to get something back, with clear explanation of this exchange, you build resentment. A relationship cancer is created that eats at the heart of the love and compassion you have for one another. What can you give just to give?
Relationship Patterns|Deserving Love|BPD cauases you to feel "Less than" and to tolerate mistreatment. Challenge this by writing three things that make you feel worthy of love and worthy in your relationship. What step can you take to strengthen your relationship? Put these into action routinely. The more you do them, the more worthy you're likely to feel.
Relationship Patterns|Simplify It|All relationship have some degree of complexity and confusion. Take a moment and think about what adds to your and what you can do to make your relationship easier; for example, be clear in stating what you want or need. As part of the relationship, you have power to influence it. Embrace your power and use it to your betterment.
Relationship Patterns|Focus on What IS, Not What Isn't|Many of us get locked into focusing on what isn't working in our relationships, which causes them to decay. Instead, ask yourself, "What work and what can I do to make it better?" Focus on the things you can say or do to help strength what's working.
Relationship Patterns|Defuse the Bomb|BPD tends to blow up a relationship when it's going well. This is likely due to your sense of worth and fear of losing the relationship. If you feel like you're going to blow it up, write down how you've sabotaged relationships in the past, and then come up with some positive alternatives. Try being open and positive about solutions.
Relationship Patterns|Fight Your Phantoms|It's common to believe or feel that you know what your partner is thinking or feeling, even without them saying or showing it. This is a phantom and it can derail relationships when done continuously. Fight your phantoms by asking clearly and non-aggresively what they're thinking or feeling. Don't fight your partner, fight your phantoms instead.
Relationship Patterns|Fallacy of Flexibility|A common fallacy is that being flexible or agreeable means you're weak or you've lost control. Flexibility is actually the backbone of a healthy relationship. Have you been flexible? Try to listen, assess, and welcome your partner's suggestions. This strengthens your relationship by helping them feel heard.
Unstable Self-Image|Your Values|Find a quiet place and list your top 5 values from most to least important. To help you, think of people, places, and things in your life and how significant of an impact they've had on you. Then, ask yourself what you can do to prioritise your values in your life.
Unstable Self-Image|Hopeful Goals|Think about where you hope to be and what you hope to be doing in two, five, and ten years. It's ok not to know specifics, but identify your hopes and then make plans to attain them. Try and make those plans as clear and attainable as possible.
Unstable Self-Image|Them to Me|Make a list of traits and skills you admire in others. Ask yourself, "What can I do to build those traits and skills in myself?" If you're not sure, ask others, search online, but learn and build the things you want.
Unstable Self-Image|Can You Hear Me?|Feeling unheard can leave you confused about your value. Ask yourself "What would make me feel heard by the people in my life? What would I want them to know?" Identify the barriers to being heard, and what can you do to weaken them?
Unstable Self-Image|Emotional Cycles|Are you a morning, afternoon, or night person? When are you most irritable, pleasant, calm, and so on? Ask yourself these questions to identify your emotional cycle and use this information to plan your day to be in better control when your cycle is high or low.
Unstable Self-Image|In My Way|Things that hold you back may include fears, cravings, negative thoughts, desires, expectations, or a low tolerance for risk. Make a list of what's holding you back, and then, brainstorm how to move beyond them. If you're not sure, ask a trusted friend or mental health provider.
Unstable Self-Image|Strengthening Strengths|Write down two of your strengths. It's important to write them down. Find a meme or picture that resonates with your identified strength. Put it in your phonr, on your fridge, in your car, on your bathroom mirror, or on your 3DS. Embrace the strength and accentuate it. It's a true part of you!
Unstable Self-Image|View of You|How do you want to be seen? Brave, smart, attractive, funny? What else? What aspects of yourself ring true to the person you want to be? Write them down and resist the BPD tendancy toward negative thoughts. A postive view of yourself is in reach, stay true to it!
Unstable Self-Image|Stop Splitting Who You Are|Splitting is seeing things, including yourself, as all good or all bad. This perpetuates your BPD, but it's time to repeal it. Challenge your split thinking with something gray! Replace "always", "never", and "forever" thoughts with "maybe", "sometimes", and "could be" thoughts.
Unstable Self-Image|Like/Dislike|Without considering the thoughts or feelings of others, make a list of things you like and dislike. Take inventory of your life and embrace the things you like, while creating a plan to remove the things you don't. Make this a continual habit until you have a life of more likes than dislikes.
Impulse Management|Empowered Choice|The next time you have an impulsive urge, try to STOP, notice your body and mind, take a deep breath, and say the urge out loud. Ask yourself "What will happen if I do it" and "What can I do differently that will be the better outcome for me"?
Impulse Management|Precursor to Control|Identify the thoughts, feelings, and situations that are often present right before you act impulsively. You can control them by reframing your response with imagery. Instead of seeing yourself acting out, imagine putting your hands in your pockets, taking deep breaths, and not acting. Reframe your mind and you'll reframe your behaviour.
Impulse Management|Name the Urge|Think of an urge that drives your impulsive behaviour. Now give it a name; it can be a funny or odd names, like "pumpkin pop". By identifying it, you're preparing yourself to not only notice it, but to control it before it consumes you.
Impulse Management|The Cost of Rage|When you're not activated, think about what you typically lose or gain by giving in to your impulsive rage. You're likely to lose the long-term benefits of staying calm and pay the short-term cost of rage. Writing out the costs of your rage will help you remember them, and help you reconsider your impulsive urges in the future.
Impulse Management|Extinguish the Flame|Put out the flame of rage by splashing cold water on your face, rubbing an ice cube on your forehead, or grabbing a frozen washcloth from your freezer 9Which you've prepped for this very occassion) and putting it on your arm or face. This redirects your focus to the present, so you can calmly choose what to do next.
Impulse Management|Impulsive Images|You likely picture your behaviour before you act. This is a critical point at which you can choose to engage or disengage from the destructive act. Challenge this mental picture and replace it with one that is less aggressive and self-destructive. This lessens the intensity of the situation that activated you.
Impulse Management|Safe Space|When you get the urge to act out toward someone else, give yourself a "safe space". Put some physical distance between you and the person that activated you. With some space, you can consider other options or calm yourself down, creating even more of a safe space.
Impulse Management|Redirect Physical Self-Attack|When you feel the impulsive urge to physically attack yourself, resist going to that old maladaptive habit and push the palms of your hands together as hard as you can. USe every ounce of impulse. If you can, screan out all those words and thoughts. Do this until your arms are tired and your voice is hoarse.
Impulse Management|Redo Your Disposition|If you ten to "run hot" and feel "on edge" all the time, you need to redo your disposition and lower your usual high emotional level. Do daily meditations or take brain breaks" and just sit without distraction. Over time, this will lower your overall temperament.
Impulse Management|Remix Self-Attacking Thoughts|Monitor your thoughts for negative, hurtful and deprecating content, like "I'm such a loser". Remix these thoughts by replacing them with positive, helpful, and supportive ones, like "I can do this", or "I will choose to be my best self". It may feel odd at first, but the more you do it, the easier and more powerful it gets.
Dissociation|Prelude to Disconnection|What happens before you disconnect from the present (dissociate)? Is it an intrusive thought or image> Is it when you get agitated? Is it when you feel physical pain or sadness? Knwoing your prelude can help you better manage the nevironment and circumstances that contribute to dissociation.
Dissociation|Get Grounded|Grab an object. Hold it in your hand and focus on its texture. Is it hot or cold, hard or soft, rough or smooth? Gather as much detail as you can about this object and breathe slowly as you learn more about it. This keeps you grounded and present.
Dissociation|Take the Plunge|When you feel yourself detach from yourself or your surroundings, plunge your hands or feet into water and notice the details. Is it cold or warm, deep or shallow? Then, reorient to the present and ask yourself a present-centered question, like "What colour shirt am I wearing?"
Dissociation|What's That?|Sounds are everywhere, even inside of us. To bring yourself to the present, listen intently to the sounds around you, or to your own heartbeat. Let the sounds wash over your to remind you where you are.
Dissociation|5-4-3-2-1|Start at five and go backwards identifying things around you. For example, list five things you see, then four things you hear, then three things you can touch, two things you can smell, and one thing you can taste. Be sure to notice the details you tend to miss, like less prominent colours or subtle aftertastes.
Dissociation|Four-Letter Words|Think of three four-letter words, any four letter words you want (Yep, any). Now, spell each of the words backwards in the order they popped into your mind. This focus exercise helps you redirect your attention to the present. It's fun too.
Dissociation|Medicine of Laughter|Laughter is the best medicine, and it's also a great focusing technique. When you feel your stress rising and the connection to yourself and the world around you start to separate, look at a funny video clip or picture. Laughing will bring you back to the present.
Dissociation|Go Sail Away|Your stress level gets so high that you may dissociate. When this happens, stop and visualise all the words that make up the stressful person or situation and put them on a sailboat docked at a port. Next, see yourself as the wind blowing the sailboat out to sea. You can also sink it when it's out there, if you'd like.
Dissociation|Mountain of Safety|Draw or imagine yourself putting all your stress, fear, and anger into a box at the top of a giant mountain. Add as much detail as you can to the box and mountain and watch it tumble to the base. It's gone, and you're sage on top of your mountain.
Dissociation|Listen to Love|Consider the voice of someone you love and imagine them telling you words of encouragement. Alternatively, find a song that's empowering and positive to listen to. Do this on a regular basis to strength feelings of love.